so the moon goes around the earth at
about a kilometer a second the earth
goes around the Sun at about thirty
kilometers a second and the Sun goes
down the center of the Milky Way at 200
kilometers per second but that is
absolutely piddly in comparison to the
speed that the stars go around the
center of this galaxy they go around it
five hundred kilometers per second
that's 310 miles a second that speed and
I'm in Scotland this is the reigning
champ of spiral galaxies it does not get
any bigger or better than this
the funny thing about this video is that
I had decided to make this video on the
Fosters rotating spiral galaxy a couple
of weeks ago now I was sent a paper to
read over by one of my colleagues and
they'd written up some research work
that they've done and they were talking
about rotation speeds of galaxies and it
just made me think like what is the
fastest to spiral galaxies can rotate so
I was trying to like compare it to sort
of you know how big how small a fee is
and so I ended up in this little bit on
Wikipedia spiral looking up what is the
fastest rotating spiral galaxy and
obviously happened on this one and then
literally the next day Astronomy Picture
of the Day was of this galaxy and I just
I couldn't believe it was such a
coincidence I was just like should I
sweep my office for bugs a pod listening
into my conversation somehow obviously
just a massive coincidence
so it's name is UGC one two five nine
one named because it is the twelve
thousand five hundred ninety first
galaxies in the upsell or general
catalog it's very uninventive but we'll
get to that now it speed was first
measured back in 1986 by Giovanelli
haynes rubin and four and they might be
names you'll recognize if you've watched
a couple of other videos on this channel
because you know they're sort of the big
names in galaxy evolution so they crop
up a lot especially rubin and ford so
for some background can Ford developed
an advanced type of what we call a
spectrometer this is the device that
lets you take the light from an object
in space split it through a prism into
its rainbow you know Pink Floyd Dark
Side of the Moon style so that you get
all of its component wavelengths and
then a spectrometer actually is able to
record how much light at each of those
wavelengths or colors you actually have
from that object ken Ford's new
spectrometer gave you a much better
resolution so we're used to hearing the
term resolution in terms of images it
means that your pixels get smaller and
smaller and you can see finer detail
same thing for a spectrometer except
it's the difference in wavelengths to
the next wavelength you're recording so
instead of making sort of say a point
five nanometer jump you can make a point
one nanometer jump and it gets much
finer so you can see much more detail in
a galaxy and it means that for a single
galaxy you don't just see say the
overall redshift of a galaxy so how much
the emission and absorption line
features in a galaxy spectra are shifted
because the universe is expanding and
the galaxy is moving away from us you
can also see the difference between one
side of the galaxy and another because
okay yes you've got the overall movement
of the galaxy away from you because of
the expansion of the universe but some
of the galaxies will also then be coming
towards you slightly and some of it will
be moving away from you as it rotates
and so with that finer detail you can
actually see that in the spectra of the
galaxy that you record so enter stage
left Vera Rubin in the 60s and she used
Canford spectrograph to measure what we
call a rotation curve of galaxies to say
pick a point in the galaxy how fast are
the stars going around it and then you
can plot like distance from galaxy to
rotation speed so the shape they
expected for that was the same shape
that we see in the solar system so if
you look at the planets in the solar
system and you take mercury for example
mercury goes around the Sun every 88
days or so whereas Jupiter takes 12
years right the further out from the Sun
you go the much longer the orbit is and
that's because all of the mass in the
solar system is pretty much concentrated
in the Sun 99.9 percent of the mass in
the solar system is in the Sun so
because all your mass is concentrated in
the center you end up with that shape
just by you know orbital maps that
Newton and Kepler came up where they
just go so for a galaxy when you look at
it you see that most of the stars are
concentrated in the center rather than
on the outskirts it gets much fainter on
the outskirts if you plot sort of like
the concentration of light across the
galaxy you see it falling off so we
assume there are way more stars in the
center than there are on the outskirts
so there's much more mass in the center
as well so when you take sort of radius
in a galaxy and you plot what speed and
the stars are tasting out we expected it
to be the same shape as for the solar
system but that's not what via Rubin and
Ken board found they actually found that
it was the
complete opposite you had lower speeds
in the center and it got higher and
higher as you got out towards the
outskirts of the galaxy now that didn't
make sense because well all the mass is
supposed to be in the center and that
suggested all the mass was actually on
the outskirts but we don't see any mass
there essentially this was one extra
piece of evidence that astronomers had
at the time for dark matter I did a
previous video and all the evidence we
had and how it built up over the decades
so that the only option we had to
conclude was that it could be dark
matter but that didn't happen for a
decade or so after Ruben and Fords
results so at the time this was
definitely something that was incredibly
puzzling and so Vera Rubin and Ken Ford
then really focused a lot of their
efforts on studying these galactic
rotation curves that went from being
something that was sort of like and yeah
I guess we should look at that and make
sure that our assumption is correct to
something that's like we can't currently
explain it so this then brings us back
to like 1986 and UGC one two five nine
one which i think deserves a better name
right because it's the fastest spinning
galaxies in the universe that we know of
anyway and so you know what I think I'm
gonna double the minogue galaxies
because you know what like Kylie it's
[Music]
anywho so they could get the speed that
the stars were rotating in the galaxy
quite well thanks to Ken Ford's new
advanced spectrometer device thingy
scientific term but what they couldn't
get very well was the mass of the galaxy
and so what they would tend to do is
from the rotation curve asked me how
much mass had to be in those areas and
then compare it to how much mass they
saw in stars and they estimate that it
was anywhere in the region of sort of
like three to nine times more mass than
we could see which is a very loose area
to try how much maths is in the actual
galaxy but with that estimate they then
made this really nice plot of the sort
of maximum speed the galaxy was rotating
out to how much mass was sort of
interior in the galaxy and you can see
it's right at the top end of this graph
and then this graph massively distracted
me while I was preparing this video
because I was also like oh what's this
galaxy that's way heavier than anything
else on this plot and so again I fell
into a Wikipedia spiral so this galaxy
is UGC to eight eight five also known as
Rubens galaxies named after Vera Rubin
herself and at the time it was the most
massive galaxy known and somehow I have
never seen this galaxy before in my life
and it is freaking gorgeous like how
have I missed this before especially cuz
it's named after we were Rubin who is
like one of my you know Astrophysical
heroes I would think I would have seen
it but I haven't and I wish I'd had like
a little vlog camera going at the moment
that I saw this image for the first time
because my reaction was just one of like
it's beautiful and now I want to make
another faces weird video but on Rubens
galaxy instead of this one so I guess
that's coming at some point in the
future course it's no longer the most
massive galaxy anymore we know a bigger
one so again Wikipedia spiral down to
finding the new most massive spiral
galaxies do we know which is is ohd
s27 which is the 27th galaxy in the
herbal deep field search for galaxies so
relatively speaking Minogue's galaxy is
quite massive but nowhere near as
massive is ISO HDFS 27 which also needs
a better name you know if it's the most
massive of all the spiral galaxies you
know we're talking about a big behemoth
here this should have a cool name so I
think I'm all out of ideas but you guys
let me know like in the comments what
you think this should be called and I'll
pin my favorite so rubens galaxy was
superseded by something more massive
than it but Minogue's galaxy is still
the fastest rotating galaxy that we know
of so we want to know how much mass is
in there and if that is responsible for
the fast rotation speed so for that you
need to know how much mass is in stars
so you know how much light can you see
in the galaxy and assuming some sort of
distribution of different types of stars
can you then work out a rough mass then
you need to know how much gas mass is in
there because most galaxies you know
have very high gas masses which they use
to make more stars but sometimes that
gas is unusable and it's very difficult
to detect gas because unless it sort of
been energized by either some star
that's forming next to it or the energy
from a black hole you're never actually
gonna get any light from that gas it's
quite difficult and then also you want
to know how much dark mass is there as
well which you get from sort of the
gravitational mass of the galaxy and you
want to know sort of the ratio between
the two and I was surprised at how long
we had to wait from 86 to actually
getting this because the next paper I
could find on the archive the sort of
list of all astronomy papers online was
from 2012 and this was when they finally
managed to look at this with x-ray data
so you need x-ray to actually detect the
the hot gas that's unusable for star
formation that you're never gonna see
instead of the optical from any emission
from the gas due to say stoppage and you
know black hole energy being given off
whatever it is so this was done by dye
and carburetors in 2012 and they managed
to get an x-ray gas mass and then they
managed to obviously get the masses in
stars they had the gravitational mass of
the galaxy which is sort of the total
dark posters plus cats
and they managed to figure out that
about three to four percent of the
galaxy is normal matter and the rest is
dark that is incredibly low for a galaxy
it's three times less than it should
have there's a really well-known
correlation between the speed that the
galaxies are rotating out and then the
amount of normal matter that it has in
it and you can see that it lies well
below that correlation so we know
straight away that something is up here
in this galaxy and a side note again got
totally distracted by this little point
on this plot as well that's galaxy NGC
1961 again it's amazing looking and it
turns out that it also has a normal
matter fraction of about three to four
percent in that galaxy as well so the
fact that both of these are rotating
quite fast in terms of the speed that
spiral galaxies rotate at and they have
this reduced normal matter fraction
suggest that there could be something
going on here and that correlation that
we've measured for maybe lower speed
rotating galaxies isn't sort of a
straight line all the way up maybe it
sort of flattens out as you get to a
certain speed maybe to get to that
certain speed you somehow have to get
rid of some of your normal matter to do
it and to give you that sort of
heightened ratio of dark to normal
matter so the big question obviously is
why would that be happening and how
would that be happening yes it's just
science in a nutshell there but die and
collaborators actually looked at this
and they suggested that actually the
normal matter might still be there and
this galaxy might still have the normal
ratio it's just that that normal matter
might have been expelled to the
outskirts but it you also wouldn't be
able to see it because it would be in
the form of coal gas with nothing to
irradiated to make it glow so that we
could see that it's there and so it
could be that there's a lot of normal
matter out where you would typically
expect to find all the dark matter as
well and so you would attribute that
master
more dark matter and that's the nice
hypothesis but you've also got to
explain what process could have thrown
out that much over the matter to the
outskirts and so diet I'll consider this
as well they suggested maybe it could
have been because of supernova so if the
galaxy has formed many many stars then
perhaps those of all in the sort of
resulting supernova explosion have
thrown out a lot of the gas into the
outskirts but then they worked out how
much energy you would need to throw out
as much missing matter as there is in
this galaxy and they worked out you
would need 50 billion supernovae to do
that
50 billion now in a typical galaxy you
have about a supernova a century so
there literally hasn't been enough time
for that galaxy to have had 50 billion
supernovae to do this the other option
is energy output from the region around
a supermassive black hole in the center
so there's been a long-standing theory
that if you chuck too much matter onto
the black hole at once the pressure
around that from that matter get trying
to spiral in so fast is it'll be eaten
by the black hole builds up and builds
up so much so that the black hole then
also expels sort of a wind or a jet or
some form of outflow again that injects
a lot of energy back into the system can
pick up a lot of that gas that's in the
galaxy and dump it in the outskirts I
like to call these things burps of
supermassive black holes and it's very
relevant in a minute because we
literally just had the news of there
being this huge big burp in a galaxy
cluster about 380 million light-years
away if you want to hear more about that
that will be in this month's night sky
news that's coming in a couple of weeks
so it's stay tuned for that because this
is literally my favorite news piece of
all this one so very excited to talk
about it on this channel but again if
you do some estimate of how much energy
you can get from that process to how
much energy it would take to dump that
much amount of matter in the outskirts
you fall short again now it could be
that it's a combination of the supernova
and feeding the black hole because if
you've got enough gas to make lots of
stars and maybe you've thrown enough gas
into the region around the black hole as
well it's cause that sort of you know
feedback loop process
of all the matter but it could be some
other process entirely that you or me or
dye and collaborators just haven't
thought of yet you know something maybe
that we've never even considered in how
a galaxy forms in the first place maybe
there was some process that stopped the
gas or falling in towards the center and
comping under gravity maybe there was
some process that just kept it all there
on the outskirts making those stars in
the minogue galaxies spin around the
center of the galaxy ever faster and
faster and faster
just like Kylie
[Music]
click off stupid 10-minute video length
yeah I know you're a photo camera but
could you just be a video camera for me
in just one day a week so relatively
speaking Minogue's galaxy is quite
massive but nowhere near as massive as
the IH the ISO hdfs 27 so Rubens galaxy
got superseded by something that was way
more massive than it but Minogue's
galaxy okay and GC one two one two five
nine one and then we need to know how
much gas mass there is in that galaxy
hello tummy Rumble hungry came across a
mic but I hope it didn't spinning around
in the fastest way it's cause of my dark
matter that I am like this